hello hello everyone welcome back um if
everybody could make their way over to
the stage we're going to get started
with our afternoon
sessions um thanks everybody for being
here um and for munching on the snacks
that I ordered appreciate that um my
name is Wade I'm the associate curator
here and I'm really excited to introduce
two folks who need no introduction even
hearing from them today uh don Hansen
and Sammy verer uh they I have really
personally I thought that rather than
doing a full introduction because you
know about them I could tell you my
relationship to the two of them um I was
actually the curator who curated one of
the very first prototypes for new art
city justtin was launched Don sent me a
message and told me I have this crazy
idea let's make something cool and I
said heck yeah um so it's just so
beautiful two years later to see how new
art city has developed to see how their
program has developed and all the ways
in which they're thinking about tools
for artists and retooling for artists
are making positive impacts in the space
without further Ado let's pass it over
to Sammy and
Don yeah dismal sessions was a banger
thank you Wade Wade you were one of the
the very first people to know about the
idea of new art city and you said yes
please we need that so thank you for
being a
catalyst hi
hi so um today we're gonna talk about a
little bit about New York City but
really about virtual access lab our
brand new research lab situated here at
gray area but first um we'll Breeze
through this because we we've been
talking about it all day but what is
newor City it is a uh it's an artist run
virtual space founded in March of 2020
which allows artists to make 3D
multiplayer websites without
code and it's a community for digital
art that spans the
globe and we' shown over 5,000 artists
at this point nearing 6,000 uh it's
growing every day and people make all
sorts of interesting 3D worlds on New Y
City from the pragmatic to the wildly IM
imaginative some examples like this is
more
of replicating a physical sort of
gallery with walls and pieces on the
walls and of course some sort of
floating 3D object but it spans all the
way
into crazily imaginative things that you
can't do in reality and that's what we
want to
support oh yeah that's a good one that's
what this one's one of my favorites you
you drop through an esophagus to enter
the space um Alice is one of my favorite
artists and You misspelled her
name we'll fix that for the next time
and yeah Sammy was one of the very first
beta testers and became an integral part
of our
project so since the beginning there's I
think this this screenshot is a bit old
but we've got around like 200 Public
shows at this point and so it's this
sort of compounding thing where like the
artworks and the exhibitions are adding
up and adding up and this is our our
responsibility as stewards we we are
making a space for art and now we have a
ton of it right it so we we've always
made the choice not to delete people's
work from it whether they're paying us
or not um and I think we sort of felt a
responsibility to do more than just
store the work because storage and
preservation are not the same
thing yeah and so we're of course trying
to solve problems for artists building
all of these like digital tools and
digital features that are like
exhibition Focus like blah blah blah we
got all these features like yeah but the
part of the key is to make it so easy
that you go in in first person just like
a video game and you can install in
first person and there's not a big comp
complicated interface to do this we just
try to make it as easy as possible and
every piece comes with a kind of
one-on-one sort of view with that work
and the metadata so there's all of these
tools to edit the metadata including all
the of the textual fields and every 3D
space has a 2d um editor view for all of
that
metadata
so why is it a website and not an app
you're you're actually better at
answering that question than me um not
to harp on the the topic too much it's
kind of the same as what we were talking
about in this panel just now but a
website has much longer longevity than a
native app so if we were to make an app
say for the iPhone for
example we're really at the discretion
of the platform Apple to keep things in
their store or take them down and every
time there's an operating system update
it's the developer responsibility to fix
it for the next operating system or else
eventually it gets removed and this is
artwork this is like culturally
important stuff we don't want a company
like Apple or Google or whatever store
that manages a a um Marketplace to be
the one who decides and doesn't even
like realize they're just like phasing
out a bunch of artwork it has to be a
website because websites are long-term
it's it's something that's going to
stick around and it's also mutable right
that when you're preserving New Media
art you have to embrace change the the
static object is is no longer relevant
and JavaScript will not be here forever
I'm certain of that but if you're
thinking of a 10year time scale of
preservation then this is pretty much
your best bet for doing what we're doing
right now so we think a lot about the
the preservation aspect and it has
become more and more important as we've
gone on and that's kind of leading us
into um the virtual access lab that we
are launching
here but to talk a bit about some of the
programming that we do and continue to
do that funnels into in part the virtual
access lab everything we do is
prioritizing artists and we've done
commissions yes I mean our commissions
are really opportunities to sort of
offer the type of services that we would
offer to a paying institutional client
directly to an artist so that means you
know opening up take as much space as
you want and more importantly there's a
lot of one-on-one support and these and
we're sort of helping people technically
realize things within the constraints
that are set out and sort of pushing
those constraints and saying okay like
what can we build into this platform
what can we learn from this experience
that will benefit
everyone yeah and so these one-on-one
commissions also feed into these larger
projects so every year we run a new art
City Festival and it was when we first
started New York City we didn't know if
it was going to be like popular or
anything it was just a little experiment
online but by the time we hit the one
year mark which was like the birthday of
the domain name registration we're like
okay we've got a lot we got a lot of
artwork here let's celebrate this work
and so now every year on the domain name
registration birthday of the website we
do a new art City Festival that is
curating from within the community and
it's more of an opt-in process we let
everybody know the festival is happening
do you want your art to be in it because
you've been creating here at new art
city right and I think the first year
was interesting because we I have
princess mode so I can see what
everybody's doing and I was like oh all
of these people are starting exhibitions
but there isn't necessarily this impetus
to release it or people are like oh I'm
not really sure when it's finished so
like giving people this deadline was
meant to be inspiring and indeed I think
28 or like 30 artists ended up showing
and tons of people came I think like
50,000 people came to our first Festival
it was
Unreal and our most recent Festival is
called memory card we're going to touch
on that in a bit because it really plays
into the preservation aspect but to talk
more about some of the programming that
we do we also run a Residency
program yes and uh yeah this Residency
program it's I I think there are a lot
more iterations that are going to take
place uh in the way that we practice it
but it was a way to yeah be present with
artists and try to support work that
didn't necessarily have a commercial or
transactional application and try to
look for artists who were trying to
realize a work that is best realized in
Virtual space and two out of three of
these have these really like ritual
generational sort of uh sort of uh
processes like hu Quan created a shrine
for her her um autobiographical feminist
religion
um and and and he fagundes is
speculating on a future of nfts where
you can um collect a person as an nft
and he has these 3D scans of his family
and he took a 3D scan of his grandfather
about six months before his grandfather
passed away and metamorphous by Luca Lee
is so incredible and Luca is looking at
these three different time scales of
himself pre- and post transition and of
the of of a future you know some some
like in some distant place where he's
dealing with AI representation of queer
latinx bodies and then he thinks even
further in the future of this kind of
resurrection of a an extinct Chilean
tribe that he that um he's he's from
Chile um and so I think it's it's it was
really yeah an opportunity to to spend
like deep time with the with these types
of works and like give back to
artists Yeah in our programming and our
kind of software design we're always
trying to figure out how to make this
easier and working one-on-one with these
artists really is like a process of
finding where the rough edges are and
it's like individual it's both
benefiting them and it's benefiting us
and in the process of making everything
easier that's sort of where the theory
of accessibility comes from in our in
our project we want to make it as easy
as possible and if we start from making
things accessible it's going to be
easier for everybody who uses the
tools so we have a few strategies around
this and there's two sides of it there's
accessibility to enjoy the artwork
that's on new art city and there's
accessibility to produce artwork on new
art city so just some of the strategies
that we've taken so far for enjoying the
work we every every 3D space has an
accessible 2D catalog view screen reader
compatible Altex for artworks of course
that's sort of like first step and we
conduct usability testing with people
who enjoy art and go to Art experiences
and try to learn how do they how do they
enjoy art experiences with with their
disabilities and how can we accommodate
that um and we even ask questions that
aren't even like really relevant to like
the the online space it's like when you
go to a museum like what senses do you
use like and how how do you navigate
these spaces to understand a much more
holistic view of the person's
experience and just to make it easier to
for anybody to enjoy the art it's
extremely fast just to drop into a space
like that was one of the very first
design requirements you don't have to
log in you don't have to answer any
questions you don't have to check cookie
banners or anything like that that was
very important to us to just like be
able to send a link to somebody and have
them enjoy your
piece and to use the toolkit is it's
it's also very important I think like
virtual reality is such a gate kept
field because there are so many
intersecting expertise that you need to
author in these spaces and so as I said
earlier today I'm like a living example
of like you don't even I didn't even
consider myself a visual artist when I
started using new art City I was a sound
artist allegedly and I would put my
sounds in there and I had zero technical
experience with webxr whatsoever and
these are the types of people that we
want to welcome in right one of my big
hobby horses is 50% of people in the
world access the web through their
mobile device so that is the viewer
experience that we want to optimize for
um and you know I have no idea what
percentage of people own headsets but
the reason why we haven't developed for
the headset is because the tools of web
2 are unequally distributed and those
are the people we want to
address and in order to approach this
problem from a range of perspectives and
get real professional help with it we
established an accessibility panel of
experts including Nat Decker Andy Slater
Viv Chu who is also stuck on the bridge
um and um and Charlotte strange
Charlotte strange yes um and so this is
this is a a group to whom we're
accountable as we establish
accessibility goals and they're people
who have all of this interdisciplinary
knowledge in how to set those priorities
in the first place um and it's just been
enormously helpful and it's like yeah I
mean we're really so grateful to have
had their their like generous help in in
this like process of
becoming and here's just a few shots of
sort of the accessible modes like the
left is the 2D catalog View kind of like
going through each artwork and then each
artwork with its metadata and the
metadata editor field for alt text just
the kind of the flow to see it and enter
that
information some bold statements
preservation is more than code and
access is more than accessibility I was
speaking with a a preservationist the
other day and he was like well what's
the deal new it's just code and I think
that is really where we differ that like
yes we figured out how to how to store
the code we're
orientationally um we we believe that it
should be portable that you shouldn't
have platform lock in and access is more
than accessibility because it's not
about who you let in it's about who you
invite in um and so this is sort of the
inspiration for our our most recent new
Art City Festival memory card um and
memory card you're about to see a lot of
my face on here and we're going to learn
more about that so one of the things we
learned in our user testing was that um
blind folks often prefer touch tours or
um or guided tours from the artist like
if your if your experience with the
world is not primarily visual then
visual description can only take you so
far in producing a resonant exhibition
experience and so what we decided to do
was invite artists in our open call from
the community to contribute both oral
history interviews of this time and
place because these were all created
during the pandemic and everybody's
experience with that was so evocative
and we also I conducted every single one
of these interviews where I was
providing live visual description as the
artist walks around and speaks to the
work and we also sort of provided
support for the artists to to author the
alt text for their their spaces if they
hadn't already which then produces this
kind of complete preservation practice
like if somebody some Museum was
starting to preserve your work 10 years
from now this is what they would do and
we said and we were doing this for
Tamiko the in fact and we were saying
why shouldn't artists have access to
this today um and so one thing we
learned in this process I conducted
every interview Sammy is not scalable um
and so one of the things that we thought
was really we pulled all of the artists
after the experience and 50% of them
said they would love to return and both
conduct tours conduct interviews and
support other artists in this work of
access because we really believe in
Access as an act of direct action and
Community Care uh and so this is really
the one of The Inspirations for um for
forming virtual access lab um and you
can we're going to see a little diagram
here but the reason why we wanted to do
this is because opening the door to an
ALT text field is not the same as giving
the artist the cultural tools
to enact these acts of care for their
own practices and so virtual access lab
encompasses this broad definition of
pres preservation and aims to both host
and preserve the collection long term
and also empower the community to do
this AC of care for
itself yeah so we're super excited to be
partnering with gray area to form the
virtual access lab here as one of their
cohort of Laboratories research
projects and and
yeah here we are
yeah so yes researching accessible
preservation strategies for digital art
beyond the scope of newart City because
what we're doing at New City we we need
to be sustainable as a for-profit
company but the the things that we value
extend beyond the capabilities of a
for-profit company so we need these two
organizations to work together side by
side and do research for digital art
broadly we're bringing in commissions
for accessibility focused digital art of
course what we've just done with Nat and
Andy which you'll see some some shots of
our installation with Andy in a few
moments and the accessibility panel that
we establish at newart City goes along
with the virtual access lab to inform us
the mission is to make tools and
practices for accessible preservation
available to artists and to produce art
experiences which can impact the widest
possible audience
and this is our panel and we love them
and I already explained what they do but
that those are their sweet
faces so how do we preserve the work on
new art City what are the strategies
we're approaching to do this for one we
don't delete the artwork in this current
state it lives on our servers
indefinitely we're trying to figure out
how to make that long
term all artworks on New York City can
be redownloaded
so if it was your only copy of your
digital file and it's on nework City you
can always get it back and a big one we
have engineered and
prepared a system for exporting any 3D
space on newart City back out as a
static website so this means regardless
of the success of newart city as a for
profit company you can get your website
out and you can rehost it on your own
server you can put it on your own
website you can put it in your backups
it's yours and this is a data autonomy
thing but this is also it's something
that we learn from from doing a bunch of
hybrid exhibitions around the world is
that often you know there there are
different internets in different parts
of the world this is a performance thing
and this is a preservation thing for
institutions where they they want the
file to host themselves um and so I mean
this is really a lot of this was
developed both in in companionship with
artists and also with institutions we
really want to sort of bring these two
things together so the shape of that
file structure it's there's a zip
there's artworks catalog all of the
stuff required to render a website and
all of the stuff that the artist has
uploaded and then you can even host that
locally and show that in a gallery that
doesn't have Wi-Fi for example you just
run it as a local website so we're
really making this stable preservable
artifact of the things that go on newart
City you've got low battery done are we
going to last another five minutes I
yeah yeah we're doing good okay yeah
just a demonstration that it's it's
Local Host it's like you don't have to
be online to do
this suitable for as I was just saying I
already said these
things yes this was another project that
was that sort of set us on our way um we
we've been collaborating over the past
year and a half with San Jose Museum of
Art uh San Jose State University and uh
our friends Leonardo um under the
generous supervision of Rhonda hton uh
preserving foundational New Media works
in the Bay area and we reauthor uh
Tamiko the's Beyond manzar a
foundational work of VR in JavaScript
which was originally created in vermal
and part of this process was the oral
history we were talking about and it's
also trying to sort of we don't expect
that JavaScript will be here forever but
we saw what happened to vermal and we
want to make sure that this can continue
to run yeah and these kind of projects
and Partnerships are essential for us to
both learn and develop the strategies
for preserving this work and even
uplifting Arts artworks that either were
never shown at all or only shown once or
like things that need to be
preserved so virtual access lab what's
next so there are three domains that
we're working in and we really need
support and partners and participants in
all of them so what's happening right
now is these commissions with Nat and
Andy that we'll talk about a little bit
more um so like we say one-on-one artist
support um and these are me are always
have like these features always have a
pathway into
production um and this is consensual
infrastructure we're not designing
something for what we think somebody
wants we're actually asking the people
we want to serve what do you need right
now um and yes and and yeah testing with
the communities we want to serve is
really vital and hybrid installations
are a way to bring a lot of different
control schemes into the into the
process yeah hybrid installations are a
big research area for for us right now
having all of this virtual digital art
and people are now excited to show this
virtual digital art in real Gallery
spaces so we're exploring all these
different ideas on how to do that and we
want to work with more artists and more
commissioning groups to make these ideas
happen so I already touched a bit on
what we're doing with preservation and
why so we want to provide more regular
support groups for uh for example
writing alt text and having channels for
people to share feedback um doing more
live programming um with with uh visual
descriptions and audio descriptions um
and pairing artists with one another to
conduct these tours and interviews um
and incorporating more of this
documentation into the core new art City
experience so to share one of the recent
projects we just launched unseen sound
is a piece by Andy Slater he's a blind
artist and he created this large
sprawling 3D environment of audio only
there were over 100 audio pieces in this
in this piece and you navigate it via
sound only and there's subtitles and
captions with all of the the audio
pieces and through working on this it
really pushed us to expand the audio
capabilities like this is it's so
exciting to be working with these
artists who need to push boundaries in
very specific areas because it allows us
to launch features that benefit
everybody right and I think it's what's
really cool is that we have this
controller and we have these headphones
so one person is piloting the experience
and cannot watch the screen and then
everybody else is is watching the
captions appear on screen um or the
sound descriptions rather and it's sort
of you bringing to light this this
sensory
disjunction um and this is a little this
is just a little documentation here's
Andy's voice an audio only experience
where anything can happen but probably
probably won't as you wander through
through this non-visual world you will
encounter all kinds of different sounds
some of them will be loud and some of
them will be quiet some of them will be
pleasant and some of them won't be
pleasant it all depends on where you go
there's no time limit in unseen sound so
get lost until you get
bored this is called pop
swamp and this started with drawings
like a 2d map of audio files yeah just
these like silver gel pen drawings on on
on black paper and I was trying to use
them as install Jigs and it was so fun
to to sort of talk to Andy and it really
felt like a collaboration because he was
like look I trust you and it's it's like
I this it wasn't punitive from his
Direction either and that was it was I
was really uh yeah grateful um to like
receive that trust from
him
Matt you you uh you better go see that
work if you haven't seen it this is our
first VR implementation and this is our
first Waypoint navigation which is
something that we've really been wanting
to do for a long time um you know we've
already talked a lot about how much we
love not today
um yeah and we're nearly out of time
we're at negative 10
seconds elsewhere with my eyes the prick
of a safety p of over bleached Linens a
look of
pity passed along passed by passed over
Trav motion muscle memory
transportation fromal and
plas absorbing bups CS
dips so good on the
screen
T
discrimination can you stand with feet
shoulder width apart can you stretch
your arms and that interaction of
looking at the Waypoint and having it
fill up make a sound and take you there
that's the primary VR navigation style
that we debuted at this
Festival thanks thank you so
[Applause]
much